---
layout: post
title:  "Classes"
date:   2016-10-10 19:19:03 -0700
categories: classes
excerpt_separator: <!-- done -->
---
This post will cover statistics related to the vehicles classes in the game. I mostly ignore arty here and besides, the global scientific consensus is clear: It's extremely agitating. 

<!-- done -->

### This post

1. [The data and biases](#data)
2. [Global class breakdown](#global)
3. [Classes by tier](#tier)
4. [Classes by performance](#performance)
5. [Damage](#dpm)
6. [XP income](#xp)
7. [Spotting](#spotting)
8. [Kills per match](#kills)
9. [Conclusion](#conclusion)

### <a name="data"></a>The data

The dataset is every observed player-match outcome in the ~ 3000 PvP games I've played on NA and EU. This would be what you see on the scoreboard at the end of a match: So-and-so's KpM, damage etc. 

I've removed myself from the sample as otherwise my class preferences would be over-represented. While my impact on the matches still (statistically) biases the outcomes, it's probably not a a big deal for this purpose.

This dataset includes 64,903 individual player-match outcomes across all tiers. T8 to T10 are entirely NA with the exception of about 12 Leopard 2A5 games on EU.

Averages of match statistics (damage, spot damage, xp) are actually very similar in both the EU and NA sample so I don't see any reason to exclude the EU data here. Averages can hide a lot of interesting things so there might still be significant differences between the servers, but that's for another time. 

The garagedata1.xml file includes spot damage for each player. This is not shown in garage, so that's nice. 

### <a name="global"></a>Global class breakdown

class | % of total 
------|-----------
mbt   | 49.5%
afv   | 21.3%
td    | 15.3%
lt    | 11.0%
arty  | 2.9%

This is the class composition for this sample, and roughly describes the proportions of these vehicles in each tier up to and including T7. 

I can't say this is correct for the game generally. My sample is biased by the tiers I played. I would need an estimate of how much each tier is played to weight the individual tiers.

However, the class breakdown by tier - linked below - should provide pretty accurate estimates and I'd think these are pretty close to the true values. 

This doesn't account for the numbers of each class type. There are significantly more MBTs in the game, so you'd expect to see more of them. 

### <a name="tier"></a>Classes by tier

class (%) | 3  | 4  |  5 |  6 |  7 |  8 |  9 | 10
----------|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----
mbts      | 55 | 36 | 52 | 38 | 49 | 63 | 71 | 75
afvs      | 24 | 19 | 22 | 22 | 25 | 14 | 23 | 9
tds       | 15 | 25 | 16 | 13 | 21 | 13 |    | 
lts       | 6  | 8  | 10 | 22 | 6  | 7  | 16 | 16
arty      |    | 12 |    | 5  |    | 4  |    |

Up to and including tier 7 the class breakdown is roughly equal to the global sample proportions. At tier 8 the MBT percentage starts jumping. MBTs are 63% at T8 and this goes up to 75% in T10. 

TD's in T4 make up 25% of vehicles played - the highest - followed by T7 at 21%. Zhalos, LAV-300s, Pac90s and Cent 120s as you would expect. 

Light Tanks are the most rare among the non-arty. LTs make up less than 10% of every tier except for T5 (10%), T10 (16%) and T6 (22%). The Stingray is super popular, if chat has taught me anything. Tier 6 has the most light tanks, of course.

Counter-intuitively, T5 is made up of 52% MBTs, the highest for the mid-tiers. Borrowing from the next post, a lot of these are Chieftains. I assume because it's the easiest T5 to get, and possibly because you can safely camp while legitimately claiming to be holding the 'w' key. 

### <a name="performance"></a>Class performance

The statistics I've included for class performance are per-match: Damage, (scoreboard) xp, spots, spot damage and kills. 

I figured the easiest way to interpret the data was to use the MBT results as a baseline. Since MBTs are the most played class, it's a good reference point. 

One caveat. At tier 8+, many of the higher tier light vehicles are being driven moreso by decent and good players on NA. This is likely inflating the light stats a bit. The effect is probably mitigated for the class itself, but it starts to show up more in the individual vehicle stats (next post).

The table linked below shows each (non-MBT) class result as a percentage increase/decrease from the MBT base. 

For example, MBT-relative performance for tier 3:

class|DpM|XP income|spotting damage|spots|kills 
---|---|---|---|---|---
afv|-18|  5| 45|	32|	13
lt |-14|  0|  7|	17|	-7
mbt|  0|  0|  0|	 0|	0
td | 47|  8|-35|	-4| 50

At tier 3 TD damage per match (DpM) is 47% higher than the MBT value. 

AFVs are doing 18% less DpM than MBTs. 

However, at this tier AFV spot damage is 45% higher than MBTs while TD spot damage is 35% lower. 

XP income is fairly balanced, with tds and afvs bringing in 8% and 5% more than MBTs and LTs - which are even. 

### Interpreting class performance

I'll focus on particular trends. Just so I don't have to keep writing it, every stat below is relative to the MBT value at a particular tier. 

I mostly ignore tiers 1 and 2 and arty. Additionally, each of these stats shouldn't be considered to directly translate to win rate. You'd expect spotting vehicles to have more spotting damage, and TDs to have more damage. There are also significant interactions with other features, such as maps.

To the extent that the scoreboard XP calculation accurately reflects contribution, it probably correlates best with class win rates. 

[The full table](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1ojW4-WiTihMSOan8D8tpqdnm7I24WAKUAY0_O4fW5iU/edit#gid=0)

#### <a name="dpm"></a>Damage per match

Across all tiers, AFV DpM is on average lower by about 16%. AFVs in T7 seem the best at damage output, lower by only 6%. Interestingly, T6 AFVs are doing 22% less damage. Speculation is that the higher % of a particular LT might be affecting that. 

LT DpM is actually fairly close to par. The Bagel is highest at 6% above, while the Scorpion and XM8 both accurately represent themselves as the worst LTs, doing 14% less damage. 

Apart from a very significant dump at T6 (1%) and T7 (10%), TDs do more DpM than other clasess. Tier 4 dominates with 62% more DpM than MBTs, where TDs are more or less the best vehicles.

#### <a name="xp"></a>XP

XP income is generally pretty close for all classes, with a few exceptions. 

Mid-lower tier AFVs are a few % higher and then drop more significantly for T8+. LTs exhibit about this same pattern in high tiers while being pretty close to par lower down. 

TDs bring in significantly more XP per match in lower tiers. T4 (17%) and T5 (13%) are the standouts, for reasons that will become clear in a moment. TDs at T6 and T8 are in the negative by about 8%. 

Overall, MBTs have an XP income advantage at tier 8+, in the 8-10% range. 

#### <a name="spotting"></a> Spots and spotting damage

This is where it gets interesting, and where we start to see some of the problems in gameplay across tiers. I think spot damage in particular is a rough proxy for map control. It's not exact, but it gives an idea of which classes are either holding ground, or locating/suppressing movement. This occurs with armor or vision, depending on tier. 

I don't think # of spots is a great stat. There are a lot of circumstances in which individual spots are pretty useless. Racing around the map at the end of a game, or spotting at an established front where someone else would have made the spot anyway. # of spots probably correlates with "view range relative to other vehicles at tier" more than anything. 

##### The decline of spotting

Given the above, you can see that AFVs lead in # of spots across all tiers, although this decreases significantly as you go up. AFVs have the best spotting range, but this relative advantage decreases significantly in higher tiers. Especially so given the size of many maps. 

The more useful spot damage stat shows that AFVs are, by a large margin, the best scouts (on average 35% higher) up to tier 6 (19%) at which relative spotting damage starts to drop. 

##### No need for scouts when you have armor

There's a sharp reversal in spotting damage at tier 7 (-19%), after which AFVs remain significantly lower (avg. -26%) than MBTs at T8-10. This is where armor takes over map control. MBTs are relatively very poweful and there's essentially no room or need for a scouting role. MBTs have the armor and vision to do it themselves. Or, not scout as much as 'w' straight to the front.

As you'd expect, LTs aren't really in the spotting game.

##### Lower tier TDs and vision control

TDs are interesting. Spot damage and # of spots are all very negative for every tier except 4 and 5. The TD average for every other tier (3, 6 to 10) is 53% less spotting damage and 16% less spots. 

At tier 4 and 5, the # of spots are actually postive: 9% and 15%. Spot damage is only 9% and 5% lower in these tiers, which is a very big difference from the others. 

This explains why the XP income for TDs is relatively high at tiers 4 and 5. These TDs combine good damage output with map control through vision, through which they're picking up a good amount of spots and spot damage. At every other tier, the relatively low spot damage suggests TDs are staying back from the front, or at least not doing everything themselves. 

##### Challengers are the best scouts

At higher tiers MBTs bring in significantly more spotting damage than any other class, with the average of other classes being ~ 40% less than MBTs. More on this in the vehicle analysis post.

#### <a name="kills"></a>Kills

AFVs bring in more kills than MBTs except for tiers 4 (-6%) and 6 (-2%). Tier 7 is the highest at 32% more than MBTs. LTs are sorta all over the place, with the Bagel (+39%), Stingray 2 (+19%) and M8 (+21%) the standouts at their respective tiers. I'll have to check that M8 figure, I bet there are one or two specific players on NA inflating that one. 

TD kills are generally the highest across the board. T4 (+75%) is the highest, followed by T7 (+51%). T6 (+6%) and T8 (13%) are the lowest. 

#### <a name="conclusion"></a>Conclusion

This post basically puts numbers to what is fairly apparent from playing the game. 

Tier 4 TDs dominate other classes, while non-MBTs get relatively less powerful as you go up in tier. By Tier 8+, most vehicles are MBTs, and they exceed or significantly close the gap in all forms of performance. Class balance is generally pretty good up until Tier 7, with the various classes performing in the areas you'd expect. 

A final note. Stats like these provide useful contextual information, but I'll offer a warning that you wouldn't want to make game balance decisions without understanding how games are actually played and won. These kind of high-level stats can help identify problematic areas, but hide a lot of very important detail in determing actual game outcomes. 

Additionally, "class" stats are often dominated by specific vehicles, as we'll see in the next post. 

[Questions and discussion](https://www.reddit.com/r/ArmoredWarfare/comments/572xq1/an_unofficial_and_statistically_suspect_history/)